His broad figure hid hers from view for a few seconds 
and then she reappeared running up the steps. The 
door closed on her and Corley began to walk swiftly 
towards Stephen's Green. 

Lenehan hurried on in the same direction. Some 
drops of light rain fell. He took them as a warning 
and, glancing back towards the house which the 
young woman had entered to see that he was not 
observed, he ran eagerly across the road. Anxiety 
and his swift rim made him pant. He called out : 
' Hallo, Corley ! ' 

Corley turned his head to see who had called him, 
and then continued walking as before. Lenehan 
ran after him, settling the waterproof on his 
shoulders with one hand. 

' Hallo, Corley ! ' he cried again. 
He came level with his friend and looked keenly 
in his face. He could see nothing there. 
'Well?' he said. ' Did it come off ? ' 
They had reached the corner of Ely Place. Still 
without answering Corley swerved to the left and 
went up the side street. His features were composed 
in stern calm. Lenehan kept up with his friend, 
breathing uneasily. He was baffled and a note of 
menace pierced through his voice. 

' Can't you tell us ? ' he said. * Did you try her ? ' 
Corley halted at the first lamp and stared grimly 
before him. Then with a grave gesture he extended 
a hand towards the light and, smiling, opened it 
slowly to the gaze of his disciple. A small gold coin 
shone in the palm. 



THE BOARDING HOUSE 

Mrs Mooney was a butcher's daughter. She was a 
\vbman who was quite able to keep things to herself : 
a determined woman. She had married her father's 
foreman and opened a butcher's shop near Spring 
Gardens. But as soon as his father-in-law was dead 
Mr Mooney began to go to the devil. He drank, 
plundered the till, ran headlong into debt. It was 
no use making him take the pledge : he was sure to 
break out again a few days after. By fighting his 
wife in the presence of customers and by buying bad 
meat he ruined his business. One night he went for 
his wife with the cleaver and she had to sleep in a 
neighbour's house. 

After that they lived apart. She went to the priest 
and got a separation from him with care of the 
children. She would give him neither money nor 
food nor house-room ; and so he was obliged to enlist 
himself as a sheriff's man. He was a shabby stooped 
little drunkard with a white face and a white 
moustache and white eyebrows, pencilled above 
his little eyes, which were pink- veined and raw ; 
and all day long he sat in the bailiff's room, waiting 
to be put on a job. Mrs Mooney, who had taken 
what remained of her money out of the butcher 
business and set up a boarding-house in Hardwicke 
Street, was a big imposing woman. Her house had a 
73 



74 DUBLINERS 

floating population made up of tourists from Liver- 
pool and the Isle of Man and, occasionally, artistes 
from the music halls. Its resident population was 
made up of clerks from the city. She governed the 
house cunningly and firmly, knew when to give 
credit, when to be stern and when to let things 
pass. All the resident young men spoke of her 
as The Madam. 

Mrs Mooney's young men paid fifteen shillings 
a week for board and lodgings (beer or stout at 
dinner excluded). They shared in common tastes 
and occupations and for this reason they were very 
chummy with one another. They discussed with 
one another the chances of favourites and outsiders. 
Jack Mooney, the Madam's son, who was clerk to a 
commission agent in Fleet Street, had the reputation 
of being a hard case. He was fond of using soldiers' 
obscenities : usually he came home in the small 
hours. When he met his friends he had always a 
good one to tell them and he was always sure to 
be on to a good thing — that is to say, a likely horse 
or a likely artiste. He was also handy with the mits 
and sang comic songs. On Sunday nights there 
would often be a reunion in Mrs Mooney 's front 
drawing-room. The music-hall artistes would oblige ; 
and Sheridan played waltzes and polkas and vamped 
accompaniments. Polly Mooney, the Madam's 
daughter, would also sing. She sang : 

* Jhn a . . . naughty girl. 
You neednft shajn : 
You know I a7n} 



THE BOARDING HOUSE 75 

Polly was a slim girl of nineteen ; she had light soft 
hair and a small full mouth. Her eyes, which were 
grey with a shade of green through them, had a habit 
of glancing upwards when she spoke with anyone, 
which made her look like a little perverse madonna. 
Mrs Mooney had first sent her daughter to be a typist 
in a corn-factor's office but, as a disreputable sheriff's 
man used to come every other day to the office, asking 
to be allowed to say a word to his daughter, she had 
taken her daughter home again and set her to do 
housework. As Polly was very lively the intention 
was to give her the run of the young men. Besides, 
young men like to feel that there is a young woman 
not very far away. Polly, of course, flirted with the 
young men but Mrs Mooney, who was a shrewd judge, 
knew that the young men were only passing the time 
away : none of them meant business. Things went 
on so for a long time and Mrs Mooney began to think 
of sending Polly back to typewriting when she 
noticed that something was going on between Polly 
and one of the young men. She watched the pair 
and kept her own counsel. 

Polly knew that she was being watched, but still 
her mother's persistent silence could not be mis- 
understood. There had been no open complicity 
between mother and daughter, no open understanding 
but, though people in the house began to talk of the 
affair, still Mrs Mooney did not intervene. Polly 
began to grow a little strange in her manner and the 
young man was evidently perturbed. At last, when 
she judged it to be the right moment, Mrs Mooney 



76 DUBLINERS 

intervened. She dealt with moral problems as a 
cleaver deals with meat : and in this case she had 
made up her mind. 

It was a bright Sunday morning of early summer, 
promising heat, but with a fresh breeze blowing. 
All the windows of the boarding house were open and 
the lace curtains ballooned gently towards the street 
beneath the raised sashes. The belfry of George's 
Church sent out constant peals and worshippers, 
singly or in groups, traversed the little circus before 
the church, revealing their purpose by their self- 
contained demeanour no less than by the little 
volumes in their gloved hands. Breakfast was over 
in the boarding house and the table of the breakfast- 
room was covered with plates on which lay yellow 
streaks of eggs with morsels of bacon-fat and bacon- 
rind. Mrs Mooney sat in the straw arm-chair and 
watched the servant Mary remove the breakfast 
things. She made Mary collect the crusts and pieces 
of broken bread to help to make Tuesday's bread- 
pudding. When the table was cleared, the broken 
bread collected, the sugar and butter safe under lock 
and key, she began to reconstruct the interview which 
she had had the night before with Polly. Things were 
as she had suspected : she had been frank in her 
questions and Polly had been frank in her answers. 
Both had been somewhat awkward, of course. She 
had been made awkward by her not wishing to receive 
the news in too cavalier a fashion or to seem to have 
connived and Polly had been made awkward not 
merely because allusions of that kind always made 



THE BOARDING HOUSE 77 

her awkward but also because she did not wish it to 
be thought that in her wise innocence she had divined 
the intention behind her mother's tolerance. 

Mrs IMooney glanced instinctively at the little 
gilt clock on the mantelpiece as soon as she had 
become aware through her revery that the bells of 
George's Church had stopped ringing. It was 
seventeen minutes past eleven : she would have lots 
of time to have the matter out with Mr Doran and 
then catch short twelve at Marlborough Street. 
She was sure she would win. To begin with she had 
all the weight of social opinion on her side : she was 
an outraged mother. She had allowed him to live 
beneath her roof, assuming that he was a man of 
honour, and he had simply abused her hospitality. 
He was thirty-four or thirty-five years of age, so that 
youth could not be pleaded as his excuse ; nor could 
ignorance be his excuse since he was a man who 
had seen something of the world. He had simply 
taken advantage of Polly's youth and inexperience : 
that was evident. The question was : What 
reparation would he make ? 

There must be reparation made in such case. It 
is all very well for the man : he can go his ways as 
if nothing had happened, having had his moment of 
pleasure, but the girl has to bear the brunt. Some 
mothers would be content to patch up such an affair 
for a sum of money ; she had known cases of it. But 
she would not do so. For her only one reparation 
could make up for the loss of her daughter's honour : 
marriage. 



78 DUBLINERS 

She counted all her cards again before sending Mary 
up to Mr Doran's room to say that she wished to speak 
with him. She felt sure she would win. He was 
a serious young man, not rakish or loud-voiced like 
the others. If it had been Mr Sheridan or Mr Meade 
or Bantam Lyons her task would have been much 
harder. She did not think he would face publicity. 
All the lodgers in the house knew something of the 
affair ; details had been invented by some. Besides, 
he had been employed for thirteen years in a great 
Catholic wine-merchant's office and publicity would 
mean for him, perhaps, the loss of his job. Whereas 
if he agreed all might be well. She knew he had a 
good screw for one thing and she suspected he had 
a bit of stuff put by. 

Nearly the half -hour ! She stood up and surveyed 
herself in the pier-glass. The decisive expression of 
her great florid face satisfied her and she thought of 
some mothers she knew who could not get their 
daughters off their hands. 

Mr Doran was very anxious indeed this Sunday 
morning. He had made two attempts to shave but 
his hand had been so unsteady that he had been 
obliged to desist. Three days' reddish beard fringed 
his jaws and every two or three minutes a mist 
gathered on his glasses so that he had to take them 
off and polish them with his pocket-handkerchief. 
The recollection of his confession of the night before 
was a cause of acute pain to him ; the priest had 
drawn out every ridiculous detail of the affair and in 
the end had so magnified his sin that he was ahnost 



THE BOARDING HOUSE 79 

thankful at being afforded a loophole of reparation. 
The harm was done. What could he do now but 
marry her or run away ? He could not brazen it out. 
The affair would be sure to be talked of and his 
employer would be certain to hear of it. Dublin 
is such a small city : everyone knows everyone else's 
business. He felt his heart leap warmly in his throat 
as he heard in his excited imagination old Mr Leonard 
calling out in his rasping voice : ' Send Mr Doran 
here, please.' 

All his long years of service gone for nothing ! 
All his industry and diligence thrown away ! As a 
young man he had sown his wild oats, of course ; he 
had boasted of his free-thinking and denied the 
existence of God to his companions in public-houses. 
But that was all passed and done with . . . nearly. 
He still bought a copy of Reynolds's Newspaper every 
week but he attended to his religious duties and for 
nine-tenths of the year lived a regular life. He had 
money enough to settle down on ; it was not that. 
But the family would look down on her. First of 
all tliere was her disreputable father and then her 
mother's boarding house was beginning to get a 
certain fame. He had a notion that he was being had. 
He could imagine his friends talking of the affair and 
laughing. She was a little vulgar ; sometimes she 
said ' I seen ' and ' If I had've known.' But what 
would grammar matter if he really loved her ? He 
could not make up his mind whether to like her or 
despise her for what she had done. Of course, he 
had done it too. His instinct urged him to remain 




80 DUBLINERS 

free, not to marry. Once you are married you are 
