done for, it said. 

While he was sitting helplessly on the side of the 
bed in shirt and trousers she tapped lightly at his door 
and entered. She told him all, that she had made 
a clean breast of it to her mother and that her mother 
would speak with him that morning. She cried and 
threw her arms round his neck, saying : 

' O, Bob ! Bob ! What am I to do ? What am 
I to do at all ? ' 

She would put an end to herself, she said. 

He comforted her feebly, telling her not to cry, 
that it would be all right, never fear. He felt against 
his shirt the agitation of her bosom. 

It was not altogether his fault that it had happened. 
He remembered well, with the curious patient memory 
of the celibate, the first casual caresses her dress, her 
breath, her fingers had given him. Then late one 
night as he was undressing for bed she had tapped at 
his door, timidly. She wanted to relight her candle 
at his for hers had been blown out by a gust. It 
was her bath night. She wore a loose open combing- 
jacket of printed flannel. Her white instep slione 
in the opening of her furry slippers and the blood 
glowed warmly behind her perfumed skin. From her 
hands and wrists too as she lit and steadied her candle 
a faint perfume arose. 

On nights when he came in very late it was she 
who warmed up his dinner. He scarcely knew what 
he was eating, feeling her beside him alone, at night, 
in the sleeping house. And her thoughtfulness ! 



THE BOARDING HOUSE 81 

If the night was anyway cold or wet or windy there 
was sure to be a little tumbler of punch ready for him. 
Perhaps they could be happy together. . . . 

They used to go upstairs together on tiptoe, each 
with a candle, and on the third landing exchange 
reluctant good-nights. They used to kiss. He 
remembered well her eyes, the touch of her hand 
and his delirium. . . . 

But delirium passes. He echoed her phrase, 
applying it to himself : * What am I to do?"* The 
instinct of the celibate warned him to hold back. 
But the sin was there ; even his sense of honour 
told him that reparation must be made for such 
a sin. 

While he was sitting with her on the side of the bed 
Mary came to the door and said that the missus 
wanted to see him in the parlour. He stood up to 
put on his coat and waistcoat, more helpless than 
ever. When he was dressed he went over to her to 
comfort her. It would be all right, never fear. He 
left her crying on the bed and moaning softly : 
'0 my God!' 

Going down the stairs his glasses became so dimmed 
with moisture that he had to take them off and polish 
them. He longed to ascend through the roof and fly 
away to another country where he would never hear 
again of his trouble, and yet a force pushed him 
downstairs step by step. The implacable faces of his 
employer and of the Madam stared upon his dis- 
comfiture. On the last flight of stairs he passed Jack 
Mooney who was coming up from the pantry nursing 



82 DUBLINERS 

two bottles of Bass. They saluted coldly ; and the 
lover's eyes rested for a second or two on a thick 
bulldog face and a pair of thick short arms. When 
he reached the foot of the staircase he glanced up 
and saw Jack regarding him from the door of the 
return-room. 

Suddenly he remembered the night when one of 
the music-hall artistes, a little blond Londoner, had 
made a rather free allusion to Polly. The reunion 
had been almost broken up on account of Jack's 
violence. Everyone tried to quiet him. The 
music-hall artiste, a little paler than usual, kept 
smiling and saying that there was no harm meant : 
but Jack kept shouting at him that if any fellow 
tried that sort of a game on with his sister he'd 
bloody well put his teeth down his throat, so he 
would. 

Polly sat for a Httle time on the side of the bed, 
crying. Then she dried her eyes and wenv over to 
the looking-glass. She dipped the end of the towel 
in the water-jug and refreshed her eyes with the cool 
water. She looked at herself in profile and re- 
adjusted a hairpin above her ear. Then she went 
back to the bed again and sat at the foot. She 
regarded the pillows for a long time and the sight of 
them awakened in her mind secret amiable memories. 
She rested the nape of her neck against the cool iron 
bed-rail and fell into a revery. There was no longer 
any perturbation visible on her face. 

She waited on patiently, almost cheerfully. 



THE BOARDING HOUSE 83 

without alarm, her memories gradually giving place 
to hopes and visions of the future. Her hopes and 
visions were so intricate that she no longer saw the 
white pillows on which her gaze was fixed or re- 
membered that she was waiting for anything. 

At last she heard her mother calling. She started 
to her feet and ran to the banisters. 

'Polly! Polly I* 

' Yes, mamma ? ' 

' Come down, dear. Mr Doran wants to speak to 
you.' 

Then she remembered what she had been waiting 
for. 



A LITTLE CLOUD 

Eight years before he had seen his friend off at the 
North Wall and wished him godspeed. Gallaher had 
got on. You could tell that at once by his travelled 
air, his well-cut tweed suit, and fearless accent. 
Few fellows had talents like his and fewer still could 
remain unspoiled by such success. Gallaher' s heart 
was in the right place and he had deserved to win. 
It was something to have a friend Uke that. 

Little Chandler's thoughts ever since lunch-time 
had been of his meeting with Gallaher, of Gallaher's 
invitation and of the great city London where 
Gallaher lived. He was called Little Chandler be- 
cause, though he was but slightly under the average 
stature, he gave one the idea of being a little man. 
His hands were white and small, his frame was fragile, 
his voice was quiet and his manners were refined. 
He took the greatest care of his fair silken hair and 
moustache and used perfume discreetly on his hand- 
kerchief. The half -moons of his nails were perfect 
and when he smiled you caught a glimpse of a row of 
childish white teeth. 

As he sat at his desk in the King's Inns he thought 
what changes those eight years had brought. The 
friend whom he had known under a shabby and 
necessitous guise had become a brilliant figure on the 

84 



A LITTLE CLOUD 85 

London Press. He turned often from his tiresome 
writing to gaze out of the office window. The glow 
of a late autumn sunset covered the grass plots and 
walks. It cast a shower of kindly golden dust on the 
untidy nurses and decrepit old men who drowsed on 
the benches ; it flickered upon all the moving figures 
— on the children who ran screaming along the gravel 
paths and on everyone who passed through the 
gardens. He watched the scene and thought of life ; 
and (as always happened when he thought of life) he 
became sad. A gentle melancholy took possession 
of him. He felt how useless it was to struggle against 
fortune, this being the burden of wisdom which the 
ages had bequeathed to him. 

He remembered the books of poetry upon his 
shelves at home. He had bought them in his bachelor 
days and many an evening, as he sat in the little 
room off the hall, he had been tempted to take one 
down from the bookshelf and read out something to 
his wife. But shyness had always held him back ; and 
so the books had remained on their shelves. At times 
he repeated lines to himself and this consoled him. 

When his hour had struck he stood up and took 
leave of his desk and of his fellow-clerks punctiliously. 
He emerged from under the feudal arch of the King's 
Inns, a neat modest figure, and walked swiftly down 
Henrietta Street. The golden sunset was waning 
and the air had grown sharp. A horde of grimy 
children populated the street. They stood or ran 
in the roadway or crawled up the steps before 
the gaping doors or squatted like mice upon the 




86 DUBLINERS 

thresholds. Little Chandler gave them no thought. 
He picked his way deftly through all that minute 
vermin-like life and under the shadow of the gaunt 
spectral mansions in which the old nobility of 
Dublin had roystered. No memory of the past 
touched him, for his mind was full of a present joy. 

He had never been in Corless's but he knew the 
value of the name. He knew that people went there 
after the theatre to eat oysters and drink liqueurs ; 
and he had heard that the waiters there spoke French 
and German. Walking swiftly by at night he had 
seen cabs drawn up before the door and richly dressed 
ladies, escorted by cavaliers, alight and enter quickly. 
They wore noisy dresses and many wraps. Their 
faces were powdered and they caught up their 
dresses, when they touched earth, like alarmed 
Atalantas. He had always passed without turning 
his head to look. It was his habit to walk swiftly 
in the street even by day and whenever he found 
himself in the city late at night he hurried on his way 
apprehensively and excitedly. Sometimes, however, 
he courted the causes of his fear. He chose the 
darkest and narrowest streets and, as he walked 
boldly forward, the silence that was spread about his 
footsteps troubled him, the wandering silent figures 
troubled him ; and at times a sound of low fugitive 
laughter made him tremble like a leaf. 

He turned to the right towards Capel Street. 
Ignatius Gallaher on the London Press ! Who 
would have thought it possible eight years before ? 
Still, now that he reviewed the past, Little Chandler 



I 



A LITTLE CLOUD 87 

could remember many signs of future greatness in his 
friend. People used to say that Ignatius Gallaher 
was wild. Of course, he did mix with a rakish set 
of fellows at that time, drank freely and borrowed 
money on all sides. In the end he had got mixed 
up in some shady affair, some money transaction : at 
least, that was one version of his flight. But nobody 
denied him talent. There was always a certain . . . 
something in Ignatius Gallaher that impressed you 
in spite of yourself. Even when he was out at elbows 
and at his wits' end for money he kept up a bold face. 
Little Chandler remembered (and the remembrance 
brought a slight flush of pride to his cheek) one of 
Ignatius Gallaher's sayings when he was in a tight 
comer : 

' Half time, now, boys,' he used to say light- 
heartedly. ' Where's my considering cap ? ' 

That was Ignatius Gallaher all out ; and, damn it, 
you couldn't but admire him for it. 

Little Chandler quickened his pace. For the first 
time in his life he felt himself superior to the people 
he passed. For the first time his soul revolted 
against the dull inelegance of Capel Street. There 
was no doubt about it : if you wanted to succeed you 
had to go away. You could do nothing in Dublin. 
As he crossed Grattan Bridge he looked down the 
river towards the lower quays and pitied the poor 
stunted houses. They seemed to him a band of 
tramps, huddled together along the river-banks, their 
old coats covered with dust and soot, stupefied by 
the panorama of sunset and waiting for the first chill 



88 DUBLINERS 

of night to bid them arise, shake themselves and 
begone. He wondered whether he could write a 
poem to express his idea. Perhaps Gallaher might 
be able to get it into some London paper for him. 
