Could he write something original ? He was not 
sure what idea he wished to express but the thought 
that a poetic moment had touched him took life within 
him like an infant hope. He stepped onward bravely. 
Every step brought him nearer to London, farther 
from his own sober inartistic life. A light began to 
tremble on the horizon of his mind. He was not so 
old — thirty-two. His temperament might be said 
to be just at the point of maturity. There were so 
many different moods and impressions that he wished 
to express in verse. He felt them within him. He 
tried to weigh his soul to see if it was a poet's soul. 
Melancholy was the dominant note of his tempera- 
ment, he thought, but it was a melancholy tempered 
by recurrences of faith and resignation and simple 
joy. If he could give expression to it in a book of 
poems perhaps men would listen. He would never 
be popular : he saw that. He could not sway the 
crowd but he might appeal to a little circle of kindred 
minds. The English critics, perhaps, would recognise 
him as one of the Celtic school by reason of the 
melancholy tone of his poems ; besides that, he 
would put in allusions. He began to invent sentences 
and phrases from the notice which his book would get. 
* Mr Chandler has the gift of easy and graceful verse. ' . . . 
*A wistful sadness pervades these poems.^ . . . 'The 
Celtic note.' It was a pity his name was not more 



A LITTLE CLOUD 89 

Irish-looking. Perhaps it would be better to insert 
his mother's name before the surname: Thomas 
Malone Chandler, or better still : T. Malone Chandler. 
He would speak to Gallaher about it. 

He pursued his revery so ardently that he passed 
his street and had to turn back. As he came near 
Corless's his former agitation began to overmaster 
him and he halted before the door in indecision. 
Finally he opened the door and entered. 

The light and noise of the bar held him at the 
doorways for a few moments. He looked about him, 
but his sight was confused by the shining of many 
red and green wine-glasses. The bar seemed to him 
to be full of people and he felt that the people were 
observing him curiously. He glanced quickly to 
right and left (frowning slightly to make his errand 
appear serious), but when his sight cleared a little he 
saw that nobody had turned to look at him : and 
there, sure enough, was Ignatius Gallaher leaning 
with his back against the counter and his feet planted 
far apart. 

' Hallo, Tommy, old hero, here you are ! What is 
it to be ? What will you have ? I'm taking whisky : 
better stuff than we get across the water. Soda ? 
Lithia ? No mineral ? I'm the same. Spoils the 
flavour. . . . Here, gar<^on, bring us two halves of 
malt whisky, like a good fellow. . . . Well, and how 
have you been pulling along since I saw you last ? 
Dear God, how old we're getting ! Do you see any 
signs of aging in me — eh, what ? A little grey and 
thin on the top — what ? ' 



90 DUBLINERS 

Ignatius Gallaher took off his hat and displayed 
a large closely cropped head. His face was heavy, 
pale and clean-shaven. His eyes, which were of 
bluish slate-colour, relieved his unhealthy pallor and 
shone out plainly above the vivid orange tie he wore. 
Between these rival features the lips appeared very 
long and shapeless and colourless. He bent his head 
and felt with two sympathetic fingers the thin hair 
at the crown. Little Chandler shook his head as 
a denial. Ignatius Gallaher put on his hat again. 

' It pulls you down,' he said, 'Press life. Always 
hurry and scurry, looking for copy and sometimes 
not finding it : and then, always to have something 
new in your stuff. Damn proofs and printers, I say, 
for a few days. I'm deuced glad, I can tell you, to 
get back to the old country. Does a fellow good, 
a bit of a holiday. I feel a ton better since I landed 
again in dear dirty Dublin. . . . Here you are, 
Tommy. Water ? Say when.' 

Little Chandler allowed his whisky to be very 
much diluted. 

" You don't know what's good for you, my boy,' 
said Ignatius Gallaher. 'I drink mine neat.' 

' I drink very little as a rule,' said Little Chandler 
modestly. ' An odd half -one or so when I meet any 
of the old crowd : that's all' 

'Ah, well,' said Ignatius Gallaher, cheerfully, 
' here's to us and to old times and old acquaint- 
ance.' 

They clinked glasses and drank the toast. 

' I met some of the old gang to-day,' said Ignatius 



A LITTLE CLOUD 91 

Gallaher. ' O'Hara seems to be in a bad way. 
What's he doing ? ' 

'Nothing,' said Little Chandler. 'He's gone to 
the dogs.' 

' But Hogan has a good sit, hasn't he ? ' 

' Yes ; he's in the Land Commission.' 

' I met him one night in London and he seemed 
to be very flush. . . . Poor O'Hara ! Boose, I 
suppose ? ' 

' Other things, too,' said Little Chandler shortly. 

Ignatius Gallaher laughed. 

' Tommy,' he said, ' I see you haven't changed an 
atom. You're the very same serious person that 
used to lecture me on Sunday mornings when I had 
a sore head and a fur on my tongue. You'd want 
to knock about a bit in the world. Have you never 
been anywhere, even for a trip ? ' 

' I've been to the Isle of Man,' said Little Chandler. 

Ignatius Gallaher laughed. 

' The Isle of Man ! ' he said. ' Go to London 
or Paris : Paris, for choice. That'd do you good.' 

' Have you seen Paris ? ' 

' I should think I have ! I've knocked about 
there a little.' 

* And is it really so beautiful as they say ? ' asked 
Little Chandler. 

He sipped a little of his drink while Ignatius 
Gallaher finished his boldly. 

' Beautiful ? ' said Ignatius Gallaher, pausing on 
the word and on the flavour of his drink. ' It's not 
so beautiful, you know. Of course, it is beautiful. . . , 



92 DUBLINERS 

But it's the life of Paris; that's the thing. Ah, 
there's no city hke Paris for gaiety, movement, 
excitement. ..." 

Little Chandler finished his whisky and, after some 
trouble, succeeded in catching the barman's eye. 
He ordered the same again. 

' I've been to the Moulin Rouge,' Ignatius 
Gallaher continued when the barman had removed 
their glasses, ' and I've been to all the Bohemian 
cafes. Hot stuff ! Not for a pious chap like you. 
Tommy.' 

Little Chandler said nothing until the barman 
returned with the two glasses : then he touched his 
friend's glass lightly and reciprocated the former 
toast. He was beginning to feel somewhat disillu- 
sioned. Gallaher's accent and way of expressing 
himself did not please him. There was something 
vulgar in his friend which he had not observed before. 
But perhaps it was only the result of living in London 
amid the bustle and competition of the Press. The 
old personal charm was still there under this new 
gaudy manner. And, after all, Gallaher had lived, 
he had seen the world. Little Chandler looked at his 
friend enviously. 

' Everything in Paris is gay,' said Ignatius 
Gallaher. ' They believe in enjoying life — and don't 
you think they're right? If you want to enjoy 
yourself properly you must go to Paris. And, mind 
you, they've a great feeling for the Irish there. 
When they heard I was from Ireland they were 
ready to eat me, man.' 



A LITTLE CLOUD 98 

Little Chandler took four or five sips from his glass. 

' Tell me,' he said, ' is it true that Paris is so . . . 
immoral as they say ? ' 

Ignatius Gallaher made a catholic gesture with his 
right arm. 

' Every place is immoral,' he said. * Of course 
you do find spicy bits in Paris. Go to one of the 
students' balls, for instance. That's lively, if you 
like, when the cocottes begin to let themselves loose. 
You know what they are, I suppose ? ' , 

' I've heard of them,' said Little Chandler. 

Ignatius Gallaher drank off his whisky and shook 
his head. 

' Ah,' he said, ' you may say what you like. 
There's no woman like the Parisienne — for style, for 

go.' 

' Then it is an immoral city,' said Little Chandler, 
with timid insistence — ' I mean, compared with 
London or Dublin ? ' 

' London ! ' said Ignatius Gallaher. ' It's six of 
one and half-a-dozen of the other. You ask Hogan, 
my boy. I showed him a bit about London when 
he was over there. He'd open your eye. ... I say. 
Tommy, don't make punch of that whisky : liquor 
up.' 

' No, really. . . . ' 

' O, come on, another one won't do you any harm. 
What is it ? The same again, I suppose ? ' 

'Well . . . all right' 

' Francois, the same again. . . . Will you smoke, 
Tommy ? ' 



94 DUBLINERS 

Ignatius Gallaher produced his cigar-case. The 
two friends Ut their cigars and puffed at them in 
silence until their drinks were served. 

' I'll tell you my opinion,' said Ignatius Gallaher, 
emerging after some time from the clouds of smoke 
in which he had taken refuge, ' it's a rum world. 
Talk of immorality ! I've heard of cases — ^what 
am I saying ? — I've known them : cases of . . . 
immorality. . . .' 

Ignatius Gallaher puffed thoughtfully at his cigar 
and then, in a calm historian's tone, he proceeded to 
sketch for his friend some pictures of the corruption 
which was rife abroad. He summarised the vices 
of many capitals and seemed incUned to award the 
palm to Berlin. Some things he could not vouch 
for (his friends had told him), but of others he had 
had personal experience. He spared neither rank 
nor caste. He revealed many of the secrets of 
religious houses on the Continent and described some 
of the practices which were fashionable in high society 
and ended by telling, with details, a story about an 
EngUsh duchess — ^a story which he knew to be tme. 
Little Chandler was astonished. 

' Ah, well,' said Ignatius Gallaher, ' here we are in 
old jog-along Dublin where nothing is known of such 
things.' 

' How dull you must find it,' said Little Chandler, 
* after all the other places you've seen ! ' 

' Well,' said Ignatius Gallaher, 'it's a relaxation 
to come over here, you k;iow. And, after all, it's 
the old country, as they say, isn't it ? You can't 






A LITTLE CLOUD 95 



