elp having a certain feeling for it. That's human 
nature. . . . But tell me something about yourself. 
Hogan told me you had . . . tasted the joys of 
connubial bliss. Two years ago, wasn't it ? ' 

Little Chandler blushed and smiled. 

'Yes,' he said. ' I was married last May twelve 
months.' 

' I hope it's not too late in the day to offer my best 
wishes,' said Ignatius Gallaher. ' I didn't know 
your address or I'd have done so at the time.' 

He extended his hand, which Little Chandler took. 

' Well, Tommy,' he said, ' I wish you and yours 
every joy in life, old chap, and tons of money, and 
may you never die till I shoot you. And that's the 
wish of a sincere friend, an old friend. You know 
that?' 

* I know that,' said Little Chandler. 

' Any youngsters ? ' said Ignatius Gallaher. 

Little Chandler blushed again. 

' We have one child,' he said. 

'Son or daughter ? ' 

'A little boy.' 

Ignatius Gallaher slapped his friend sonorously 
on the back. 

' Bravo,' he said, ' I wouldn't doubt you, Tommy.' 

Little Chandler smiled, looked confusedly at his 
glass and bit his lower lip with three childishly white 
front teeth. 

' I hope you'll spend an evening with us,' he said, 
' before you go back. My wife will be delighted to 
meet you. We can have a little music and ' 



96 DUBLINERS 

' Thanks awfully, old chap,' said Ignatius Gallaher, 
' I'm sorry we didn't meet earlier. But I must leave 
to-morrow night.' 

' To-night, perhaps . . . ? ' 

' I'm awfully sorry, old man. You see I'm over 
here with another fellow, clever young chap he is too, 
and we arranged to go to a little card-party. Only 
for that . . ." 

' O, in that case. . . .' 

' But who knows ? ' said Ignatius Gallaher 
considerately. ' Next year I may take a little skip 
over here now that I've broken the ice. It's only 
a pleasure deferred.' 

' Very well,' said Little Chandler, 'the next time 
you come we must have an evening together. That's 
agreed now, isn't it ? ' 

' Yes, that's agreed,' said Ignatius Gallaher. Next 
year if I come, parole d' honneur.^ 

* And to chnch the bargain,' said Little Chandler, 
' we'll just have one more now.' 

Ignatius Gallatime : and now he felt warm and excited. Three 
small whiskies had gone to his head and Gallaher's 
strong cigar had confused his mind, for he was a 
delicate and abstinent person. The adventure of 
meeting Gallaher after eight years, of finding himself 
with Gallaher in Corless's surrounded by lights and 
noise, of listening to Gallaher' s stories and of sharing 
for a brief space Gallaher's vagrant and triumphant 
life, upset the equipoise of his sensitive nature. He 
felt acutely the contrast between his own life and his 
friend's, and it seemed to him unjust. Gallaher was 
his inferior in birth and education. He was sure 
that he could do something better than his friend 
had ever done, or could ever do, something higher 
than mere tawdry journalism if he only got the 
chance. What was it that stood in his way ? 
His unfortunate timidity ! He wished to vindicate 
himself in some way, to assert his manhood. He 
saw behind Gallaher's refusal of his invitation. 
Gallaher was only patronising him by his friendli- 
ness just as he was patronising Ireland by his 
visit. 

The barman brought their drinks. Little Chandler 
pushed one glass towards his friend and took up the 
other boldly. 

' WTio knows ? ' he said, as they lifted their glasses. 
' When you come next year I may have the pleasure 
of wishing long life and happiness to Mr and Mrs 
Ignatius Gallaher.' 

Ignatius Gallaher in the act of drinking closed one 
eye expressively over the rim of his glass. When he 




98 DUBLINERS 

had drunk he smacked his Hps decisively, set down 
his glass and said : 

' No blooming fear of that, my boy. I'm going 
to have my fling first and see a bit of life and 
the world before I put my head in the sack — ^if I 
ever do.' 

' Some day you will,' said Little Chandler calmly. 

Ignatius Gallaher turned his orange tie and slate- 
blue eyes full upon his friend. 

' You think so ? ' he said. 

' You'll put your head in the sack,' repeated Little 
Chandler stoutly, ' like everyone else if you can find 
the girl.' 

He had slightly emphasised his tone and he was 
aware that he had betrayed himself ; but, though the 
colour had heightened in his cheek, he did not flinch 
from his friend's gaze. Ignatius Gallaher watched 
him for a few moments and then said: 

' If ever it occurs, you may bet your bottom 
dollar there'll be no mooning and spooning about it. 
I mean to marry money. She'll have a good fat 
account at the bank or she won't do for me.' 

Little Chandler shook his head. 

' Why, man alive,' said Ignatius Gallaher, ve- 
hemently, ' do you know what it is ? I've only to 
say the word and to-morrow I can have the woman 
and the cash. You don't believe it ? Well, I know it. 
There are hundreds — ^what am I saying ? — thousands 
of rich Germans and Jews, rotten with money, that'd 
only be too glad. . . . You wait a while, my boy. 
See if I don't play my cards properly. When I go 



A LITTLE CLOUD 99 

about a thing I mean business, I tell you. You just 
wait' 

He tossed his glass to his mouth, finished his drink 
and laughed loudly. Then he looked thoughtfully 
before him and said in a calmer tone : 

' But I'm in no hurry. They can wait. I don't 
fancy tying myself up to one woman, you know.' 

He imitated with his mouth the act of tasting 
and made a wry face. 

' Must get a bit stale, I should think,' he said. 

Little Chandler sat in the room off the hall, holding 
a child in his arms. To save money they kept no 
servant but Annie's young sister Monica came for 
an hour or so in the morning and an hour or so in the 
evening to help. But Monica had gone home long 
ago. It was a quarter to nine. Little Chandler had 
come home late for tea and, moreover, he had for- 
gotten to bring Annie home the parcel of coffee from 
Bewley's. Of course she was in a bad humour and 
gave him short answers. She said she would do 
without any tea but when it came near the time at 
which the shop at the corner closed she decided to go 
out herself for a quarter of a pound of tea and two 
pounds of sugar. She put the sleeping child deftly 
in his arms and said : 

' Here. Don't waken him.' 

A httle lamp with a white china shade stood upon 
the table and its light fell over a photograph which 
was enclosed in a frame of crumpled horn. It was 
Annie's photograph. Little Chandler looked at it, 



100 DUBLINERS 

pausing at the thin tight Hps. She wore the pale 
blue summer blouse which he had brought her home 
as a present one Saturday. It had cost him ten and 
elevenpence ; but what an agony of nervousness it 
had cost him ! How he had suffered that day, 
waiting at the shop door until the shop was empty, 
standing at the counter and trying to appear at his 
ease while the girl piled ladies' blouses before him, 
paying at the desk and forgetting to take up the odd 
penny of his change, being called back by the cashier, 
and, finally, striving to hide his blushes as he left the 
shop by examining the parcel to see if it was securely 
tied. When he brought the blouse home Annie kissed 
him and said it was very pretty and stylish ; but 
when she heard the price she threw the blouse on the 
table and said it was a regular swindle to charge ten 
and elevenpence for it. At first she wanted to take 
it back but when she tried it on she was delighted 
with it, especially with the make of the sleeves, and 
kissed him and said he was very good to think of 
her. 

Hm ! . . . 

He looked coldly into the eyes of the photograph 
and they answered coldly. Certainly they were 
pretty and the face itself was pretty. But he found 
something mean in it. Why was it so unconscious 
and lady-like ? The composure of the eyes irritated 
him. They repelled him and defied him : there was 
no passion in them, no rapture. He thought of what 
Gallaher had said about rich Jewesses. Those dark 
Oriental eyes, he thought, how full they are of passion, 



A LITTLE CLOUD 101 

of voluptuous longing ! . . . Why had he married 
the eyes in the photograph ? 

He caught himself up at the question and glanced 
nervously round the room. He found something 
mean in the pretty furniture which he had bought 
for his house on the hire system. Annie had chosen 
it herself and it reminded him of her. It too was 
prim and pretty. A dull resentment against his life 
awoke within him. Could he not escape from his 
little house ? Was it too late for him to try to live 
bravely like Gallaher ? Could he go to London ? 
There was the furniture still to be paid for. If he 
could only write a book and get it published, that 
might open the way for him. 

A volume of Byron's poems lay before him on the 
table. He opened it cautiously with his left hand 
lest he should waken the child and began to read the 
first poem in the book ; 

' Hushed are the winds and still the evening gloom^ 

Not ^en a Zephyr wanders through the grove^ 
Whilst I return to view my Margarefs t07nb 
And scatter flowers on the dust I lover 

He paused. He felt the rhythm of the verse about 
him in the room. How melancholy it was ! Could 
he, too, write like that, express the melancholy of 
his soul in verse ? There were so many things he 
wanted to describe : his sensation of a few hours 
before on Grattan Bridge, for example. If he could 
get back again into that mood. . . . 

The child awoke and began to cry. He turned 



102 DUBLINERS 

from the page and tried to hush it : but it would not 
be hushed. He began to rock it to and fro in his 
arms but its wailing cry grew keener. He rocked it 
faster while his eyes began to read the second stanza : 

' Within this narrow cell reclines her clay, 
That clay where once . . } 

It was useless. He couldn't read. He couldn't 
do anything. The wailing of the child pierced the 
drum of his ear. It was useless, useless ! He was a 
prisoner for life. His arms trembled with anger and 
suddenly bending to the child's face he shouted : 

' Stop ! ' 

The child stopped for an instant, had a spasm 
of fright and began to scream. He jumped up from 
his chair and walked hastily up and down the room 
with the child in his arms. It began to sob piteously, 
losing its breath for four or five seconds, and then 
bursting out anew. The thin walls of the room echoed 
the sound. He tried to soothe it but it sobbed more 
convulsively. He looked at the contracted and 
quivering face of the child and began to be alarmed. 
He counted seven sobs without a break between them 
and caught the child to his breast in fright. If it 
died ! . . . 

The door was burst open and a young woman ran 
in, panting. 

'What is it? What is it?' she cried. 

The child, hearing its mother's voice, broke out 
into a paroxysm of sobbing. 



I 



A LITTLE CLOUD 108 

* It's nothing, Annie . . . it's nothing. . . . He 
began to cry . . .' 

She flung her parcels on the floor and snatched the 
child from him. 

' What have you done to him ? ' she cried, glaring 
into his face. 

Little Chandler sustained for one moment the gaze 
of her eyes and his heart closed together as he met 
the hatred in them. He began to stammer : 

' It's nothing. . . . He ... he began to cry. . . . 
I couldn't ... I didn't do anything. . . . What ? ' 

Giving no heed to him she began to walk up and 
down the room, clasping the child tightly in her 
arms and murmuring : 

' My little man ! My little mannie ! Was 'ou 
frightened, love ? . . . There now, love ! There 
now ! . . . Lambabaun ! Mamma's little lamb of 
the world ! . . . There now ! ' 

Little Chandler felt his cheeks suffused with shame 
and he stood back out of the lamplight. He listened 
while the paroxysm of the child's sobbing grew less 
and less ; and tears of remorse started to his eyes. 



COUNTERPARTS 

The bell rang furiously and, when Miss Parker went 
to the tube, a furious voice called out in a piercing 
North of Ireland accent : 

' Send Farrington here ! ' 

Miss Parker returned to her machine, saying to a 
man who was writing at a desk : 

' Mr AUeyne wants you upstairs.' 

The man muttered 'Blast him 1 ' under his breath 
and pushed back his chair to stand up. When he 
stood up he was tall and of great bulk. He had 
a hanging face, dark wine-coloured, with fair eye- 
