brows and moustache : his eyes bulged forward 
slightly and the whites of them were dirty. He 
lifted up the counter and, passing by the clients, 
went out of the office with a heavy step. 

He went heavily upstairs until he came to the 
second landing, where a door bore a brass plate with 
the inscription Mr Alleyne. Here he halted, puffing 
with labour and vexation, and knocked. The shrill 
voice cried : 

' Come in ! ' 

The man entered Mr AUeyne's room. Simultane- 
ously Mr Alleyne, a little man wearing gold-rimmed 
glasses on a clean-shaven face, shot his head up over 
a pile of documents. The head itself was so pink and 

104 



COUNTERPARTS 105 

hairless it seemed like a large egg reposing on the 
papers. Mr Alleyne did not lose a moment : 

' Farrington ? What is the meaning of this ? 
Why have I always to complain of you ? May I 
ask you why you haven't made a copy of that contract 
between Bodley and Kirwan ? I told you it must 
be ready by four o'clock.' 

' But Mr Shelley said, sir ' 

' Mr Shelley said, sir. . . . Kindly attend to what 
I say and not to what Mr Shelley says, sir. You have 
always some excuse or another for shirking work. 
Let me tell you that if the contract is not copied 
before this evening I'll lay the matter before Mr 
Crosbie. ... Do you hear me now ? ' 

' Yes, sir.' 

' Do you hear me now ? . . . Ay and another little 
matter ! I might as well be talking to the wall as 
talking to you. Understand once for all that you 
get a half an hour for your lunch and not an hour 
and a half. How many courses do you want, I'd 
like to know. . . . Do you mind me, now ? ' 

'Yes, sir.' 

Mr Alleyne bent his head again upon his pile of 
papers. The man stared fixedly at the polished 
skull which directed the affairs of Crosbie & Alleyne, 
gauging its fragility. A spasm of rage gripped his 
throat for a few moments and then passed, leaving 
after it a sharp sensation of thirst. The man recog- 
nised the sensation and felt that he must have a good 
night's drinking. The middle of the month was 
passed and, if he could get the copy done in time, 



106 DUBLINERS 

Mr AUeyne might give him an order on the cashier. 
He stood still, gazing fixedly at the head upon the 
pile of papers. Suddenly Mr Alleyne began to upset 
all the papers, searching for something. Then, as if 
he had been unaware of the man's presence till that 
moment, he shot up his head again, saying : 

' Eh ? Are you going to stand there all day ? 
Upon my word, Farrington, you take things easy ! * 

' I was waiting to see . . .' 

' Very good, you needn't wait to see. Go down- 
stairs and do your work.' 

The man walked heavily towards the door and, as 
he went out of the room, he heard Mr Alleyne cry 
after him that if the contract was not copied by even- 
ing Mr Crosbie would hear of the matter. 

He returned to his desk in the lower office and 
counted the sheets which remained to be copied. 
He took up his pen and dipped it in the ink but he 
continued to stare stupidly at the last words he had 
written : In no case shall the said Bernard Bodley 
be . . . The evening was falling and in a few minutes 
they would be lighting the gas : then he could write. 
He felt that he must slake the thirst in his throat. 
He stood up from his desk and, lifting the counter 
as before, passed out of the office. As he was passing 
out the chief clerk looked at him inquiringly. 

' It's all right, Mr Shelley,' said the man, pointing 
with his finger to indicate the objective of his 
journey. 

The chief clerk glanced at the hat-rack but, seeing 
the row complete, offered no remark. As soon as he 



COUNTERPARTS 107 

was on the landing the man pulled a shepherd's 
plaid cap out of his pocket, put it on his head and 
ran quickly down the rickety stairs. From the street 
door he walked on furtively on the inner side of the 
path towards the corner and all at once dived into a 
doorway. He was now safe in the dark snug of 
O'NeiU's shop, and, filling up the little window 
that looked into the bar with his inflamed face, 
the colour of dark wine or dark meat, he called 
out : 

' Here, Pat, give us a g.p., like a good fellow.' 

The curate brought him a glass of plain porter. 
The man drank it at a gulp and asked for a caraway 
seed. He put his penny on the counter and, leaving 
the curate to grope for it in the gloom, retreated out 
of the snug as furtively as he had entered it. 

Darkness, accompanied by a thick fog, was gaining 
upon the dusk of February and the lamps in Eustace 
Street had been lit. The man went up by the houses 
until he reached the door of the office, wondering 
whether he could fi nish his copy in time. On the stairs 
a moist pungent odour of perfumes saluted his nose : 
evidently Miss Delacour had come while he wds out 
in O'Neill's. He crammed his cap back again into 
his pocket and re-entered the office, assuming an air 
of absent-mindedness. 

' Mr AUeyne has been calling for you,' said the 
chief clerk severely. ' Where were you ? ' 

The man glanced at the two clients who were 
standing at the counter as if to intimate that their 
presence prevented him from answering. As the 



108 DUBLINERS 

clients were both male the chief clerk allowed himself 
a laugh. 

' I know that game,' he said. ' Five times in one 
day is a little bit. . . . Well, you better look sharp 
and get a copy of our correspondence in the Delacour 
case for Mr AUeyne.* 

This address in the presence of the public, his run 
upstairs and the porter he had gulped down so hastily 
confused the man and, as he sat down at his desk to 
get what was required, he realised how hopeless was 
the task of finishing his copy of the contract before 
half past five. The dark damp night was coming 
and he longed to spend it in the bars, drinking with 
his friends amid the glare of gas and the clatter of 
glasses. He got out the Delacour correspondence and 
passed out of the office. He hoped Mr Alleyne would 
not discover that the last two letters were missing. 

The moist pungent perfume lay all the way up to 
Mr Alleyne's room. Miss Delacour was a middle-aged 
woman of Jewish appearance. Mr Alleyne was said 
to be sweet on her or on her money. She came to the 
office often and stayed a long time when she came. 
She was sitting beside his desk now in an aroma of 
perfumes, smoothing the handle of her umbrella and 
nodding the great black feather in her hat. Mr 
Alleyne had swivelled his chair round to face her and 
thrown his right foot jauntily upon his left knee. 
The man put the correspondence on the desk and 
bowed respectfully but neither Mr Alleyne nor Miss 
Delacour took any notice of his bow. Mr Alleyne 
tapped a finger on the correspondence and then 



COUNTERPARTS 109 

flicked it towards him as if to say : * TliaCs all 
right: you can go.' 

The man returned to the lower office and sat down 
again at his desk. He stared intently at the incom- 
plete phrase : In no case shall the said Bernard Bodley 
be . . . and thought how strange it was that the 
last three words began with the same letter. The 
chief clerk began to hurry Miss Parker, saying she 
would never have the letters typed in time fo
a few minutes and then set to work to finish his copy. 
But his head was not clear and his mind wandered 
away to the glare and rattle of the public-house. 
It was a night for hot punches. He struggled on with 
his copy, but when the clock struck five he had still 
fourteen pages to write. Blast it ! He couldn't 
finish it in time. He longed to execrate aloud, to 
bring his fist down on something violently. He was 
so enraged that he wrote Bernard Bernard instead of 
Bernard Bodley and had to begin again on a clean 
sheet. 

He felt strong enough to clear out the whole office 
single-handed. His body ached to do something, 
to rush out and revel in violence. All the indignities 
of his life enraged him. . . . Could he ask the cashier 
privately for an advance ? No, the cashier was no 
good, no damn good ; he wouldn't give an advance. 
. . . He knew where he would meet the boys : Leonard 
and O'Halloran and Nosey Flynn. The barometer 
of his emotional nature was set for a spell of riot. 

His imagination had so abstracted him that his 



no DUBLINERS 

name was called twice before he answered. Mr 
AUeyne and Miss Delacour were standing outside the 
counter and all the clerks had turned round in 
anticipation of something. The man got up from 
his desk. Mr Alleyne began a tirade of abuse, saying 
that two letters were missing. The man answered 
that he knew nothing about them, that he had made 
a faithful copy. The tirade continued : it was so 
bitter and violent that the man could hardly restrain 
his fist from descending upon the head of the mani- 
kin before him : 

' I know nothing about any other two letters,' he 
said stupidly. 

' You — know — nothing. Of course you know 
nothing,' said Mr Alleyne. ' Tell me,' he added, 
glancing first for approval to the lady beside him, 
' do you take me for a fool ? Do you think me an 
utter fool ? ' 

The man glanced from the lady's face to the little 
egg-shaped head and back again ; and, almost before 
he was aware of it, his tongue had found a felicitous 
moment : 

' I don't think, sir,' he said, ' that that's a fair 
question to put to me.' 

There was a pause in the very breathing of the 
clerks. Everyone was astounded (the author of the 
witticism no less than his neighbours) and Miss 
Delacour, who was a stouo see if the cashier would come out alone. All the 
clerks passed out and finally the cashier came out 
with the chief clerk. It was no use trying to say a 
word to him when he was with the chief clerk. The 
man felt that his position was bad enough. He had 
been obliged to offer an abject apology to Mr Alley ne 
for his impertinence but he knew what a hornet's 
nest the office would be for him. He could remember 
the way in which Mr Alley ne had hounded little 
Peake out of the office in order to make room for his 
own nephew. He felt savage and thirsty and revenge- 
ful, annoyed with himself and with everyone else. 
Mr Alleyne would never give him an hour's rest ; 
his life would be a hell to him. He had made a proper 
fool of himself this time. Could he not keep his 
tongue in his cheek ? But they had never pulled 
together from the first he and Mr Alleyne, ever since 
the day Mr Alleyne had overheard him mimicking 
his North of Ireland accent to amuse Higgins and 
Miss Parker : that had been the beginning of it. He 
might have tried Higgins for the money, but sure 



112 DUBLINERS 

Higgins never had anything for himself. A man 
with two establishments to keep up, of course he 
couldn't. . . . 

He felt his great body again aching for the comfort 
of the public-house. The fog had begun to chill 
him and he wondered could he touch Pat in O'Neill's. 
He could not touch him for more than a bob — and 
a bob was no use. Yet he must get money somewhere 
or other : he had spent his last penny for the g.p. 
and soon it would be too late for getting money any- 
where. Suddenly, as he was fingering his watch-chain, 
he thought of Terry Kelly's pawn-office in Fleet 
Street. That was the dart 1 Why didn't he think of 
