it sooner ? 

He went through the narrow alley of Temple Bar 
quickly, muttering to himself that they could all go 
to hell because he was going to have a good night of 
it. The clerk in Terry Kelly's said A crown ! but the 
consignor held out for six shillings ; and in the end 
the six shillings was allowed him literally. He came 
out of the pawn-office joyfully, making a little cylinder 
of the coins between his thumb and fingers. In 
Westmoreland Street the footpaths were crowded 
with young men and women returning from business 
and ragged urchins ran here and there yelling out 
the names of the evening editions. The man passed 
through the crowd, looking on the spectacle generally 
with proud satisfaction and staring masterfully at 
the office-girls. His head was full of the noises of 
tram-gongs and swishing trolleys and his nose 
already sniffed the curling fumes of punch. As he 



COUNTERPARTS 118 

walked on he preconsidered the terms in which he 
would narrate the incident to the boys : 

' So, I just looked at him — coolly, you know, and 
looked at her. Then I looked back at him again — 
taking my time, you know. "I don't think that 
that's a fair question to put to me, says I." ' 

Nosey Flynn was sitting up in his usual corner 
of Davy Byrne's and, when he heard the story, he 
stood Farrington a half-one, saying it was as smart 
a thing as ever he heard. Farrington stood a drink 
in his turn. After a while O'Halloran and Paddy 
Leonard came in and the story was repeated to them. 
O'Halloran stood tailors of malt, hot, all round and 
told the story of the retort he had made to the chief 
clerk when he was in Callan's of Fownes's Street ; 
but, as the retort was after the manner of the liberal 
shepherds in the eclogues, he had to admit that it 
was not so clever as Farrington's retort. At this 
Farrington told the boys to polish off that and have 
another. 

Just as they were naming their poisons who should 
come in but Higgins ! Of course he had to join in 
with the others. The men asked him to give his 
version of it, and he did so with great vivacity for the 
sight of five small hot whiskies was very exhilarating. 
Everyone roared laughing when he showed the way 
in which Mr AUeyne shook his fist in Farrington's face. 
Then he imitated Farrington, saying, 'And here was 
my nabs, as cool as you please,^ while Farrington 
looked at the company out of his heavy dirty eyes, 
smiling and at times drawing forth stray drops of 

H 



114 DUBLINERS 

liquor from his moustache with the aid of his lower 
lip. 

When that round was over there was a pause. 
O'Halloran had money but neither of the other two 
seemed to have any ; so the whole party left the shop 
somewhat regretfully. At the corner of Duke Street 
Higgins and Nosey Flynn bevelled off to the left while 
the other three turned back towards the city. Rain 
was drizzling down on the cold streets and, when they 
reached the Ballast Office, Farrington suggested the 
Scotch House. The bar was full of men and loud with 
the noise of tongues and glasses. The three men 
pushed past the whining match-sellers at the door 
and formed a little party at the corner of the counter. 
They began to exchange stories. Leonard intro- 
duced them to a young fellow named Weathers who 
was performing at the Tivoli as an acrobat and 
knockabout artiste. Farrington stood a drink all 
round. Weathers said he would take a small Irish 
and ApoUinaris. Farrington, who had definite 
notions of what was what, asked the boys would 
they have an ApoUinaris too ; but the boys told Tim 
to make theirs hot. The talk became theatrical. 
O'Halloran stood a round and then Farrington stood 
another round. Weathers protesting that the hospi- 
tality was too Irish. He promised to get them in 
behind the scenes and introduce them to some 
nice girls. O'Halloran said that he and Leonard 
would go but that Farrington wouldn't go because 
he was a married man ; and Farrington's heavy 
dirty eyes leered at the company in token that he 



COUNTERPARTS 115 

understood he was being chaffed. Weathers made 
them all have just one little tincture at his expense 
and promised to meet them later on at Mulligan's in 
Poolbeg Street. 

When the Scotch House closed they went round to 
Mulligan's. They went into the parlour at the back 
and O'Halloran ordered small hot specials all round. 
They were all beginning to feel mellow. Farrington 
was just standing another round when Weathers 
came back. Much to Farrington's relief he drank 
a glass of bitter this time. Funds were getting low 
but they had enough to keep them going. Presently 
two young women with big hats and a young man in 
a check suit came in and sat at a table close by. 
Weathers saluted them and told the company that 
they were out of the Tivoli. Farrington's eyes 
wandered at every moment in the direction of one of 
the young women. There was something striking in 
her appearance. An immense scarf of peacock-blue 
muslin was wound round her hat and knotted in a 
great bow under her chin ; and she wore bright 
yellow gloves, reaching to the elbow. Farrington 
gazed admiringly at the plump arm which she moved 
very often and with much grace ; and when, after 
a little time, she answered his gaze he admired 
still more her large dark brown eyes. The oblique 
staring expression in them fascinated him. She 
glanced at him once or twice and, when the party was 
leaving the room, she brushed against his chair and 
said * 0, pardon .' ' in a London accent. He watched 
her leave the room in the hope that she would look 



116 DUBLINERS 

back at him, but he was disappointed. He cursed 
his want of money and cursed all the rounds he had 
stood, particularly all the whiskies and Apollinaris 
which he had stood to Weathers. If there was one 
thing that he hated it was a sponge. He was so 
angry that he lost count of the conversation of his 
friends. 

When Paddy Leonard called him he found that 
they were talking about feats of strength. Weathers 
was showing his biceps muscle to the company and 
boasting so much that the other two had called on 
Farrington to uphold the national honour. Farring- 
ton pulled up his sleeve accordingly and showed his 
biceps muscle to the company. The two arms were 
examined and compared and finally it was agreed 
to have a trial of strength. The table was cleared 
and the two men rested their elbows on it, clasping 
hands. When Paddy Leonard said 'Go!' each was 
to try to bring down the other's hand on to the table. 
Farrington looked very serious and determined. 

The trial began. After about thirty seconds 
Weathers brought his opponent's hand slowly down 
on to the table. Farrington's dark wine-coloured 
face flushed darker still with anger and humiliation 
at having been defeated by such a stripling. 

' You're not to put the weight of your body behind 
it. Play fair,' he said. 

' Who's not playing fair ? ' said the other. 

' Come on again. The two best out of three.' 

The trial began again. The veins stood out on 
Farrington's forehead, and the pallor of Weathers' 



COUNTERPARTS 117 

complexion changed to peony. Their hands and 
arms trembled under the stress. After a long 
struggle Weathers again brought his opponent's 
hand slowly on to the table. There was a murmur 
of applause from the spectators. The curate, who 
was standing beside the table, nodded his red head 
towards the victor and said with stupid familiarity : 

' Ah ! that's the knack ! ' 

' What the hell do you know about it ? ' said 
Farrington fiercely, turning on the man. ' What do 
5^ou put in your gab for ? ' 
